feat(cert): Create a Certificate signing request using `tedge cert create-csr` (#2783)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/operate/security/certificate-signing-request.md

---
title: Certificate signing request
tags: [Operate, Security, Cloud]
description: Generate certificate signing request for %%te%%
---

If you want to use a device certificate which is signed by a Certificate Authority (CA), you can generate the Certificate Signing Request (CSR), which is later used by CA to generate a device certificate. This process requires additional tooling as %%te%% provides you only with the CSR. 

## Create a certificate signing request

To create a CSR you can use [`tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) %%te%% command:

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr --device-id alpha
```

or

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr
```

> if public key already exists and you want to reuse device name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if a self-signed certificate already exists and you want to reuse device name.
```

```text title="Output"
Certificate Signing Request was successfully created.
```

:::note

> `tedge cert` requires `sudo` privilege. This command provides no output on success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`tedge cert` requires `sudo` privilege as creating a private key owned by the MQTT broker. This command provides no output on success.
```

:::

Now you should have a CSR in the `/etc/tedge/device-certs/` directory:

```sh
ls -l /etc/tedge/device-certs/
```

```text title="Output"
total 8
-r--r--r-- 1 mosquitto mosquitto 664 May 31 09:26 tedge-csr.csr
-r-------- 1 mosquitto mosquitto 246 May 31 09:26 tedge-private-key.pem
```

[`sudo tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) creates the certificate signing request in a default location (`/etc/tedge/device-certs/`). To use a custom location, refer to [`tedge config`](../../references/cli/tedge-config.md) or provide absolute path as a command argument:

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr --device-id alpha --output-path /custom/path/mycsr.csr
```

:::note

> `tedge cert create-csr` will reuse private key if it was already created, e.g by the `tedge cert create` command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`tedge cert create-csr` will reuse the private key if already created, e.g by the `tedge cert create` command
```

:::

To check the content of CSR, you can use external tools, like `openssl`.

```sh
openssl req -in /etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-csr.csr -noout -text
```

```text title="Output"
Certificate Request:
    Data:
        Version: 1 (0x0)
        Subject: CN = alpha, O = Thin Edge, OU = Test Device
        Subject Public Key Info:
            Public Key Algorithm: id-ecPublicKey
                Public-Key: (256 bit)
                pub:
                    04:95:e6:48:48:9b:8e:03:a0:fd:07:41:e6:e7:25:
                    21:3b:ed:c7:8d:13:2f:69:a7:94:17:43:7c:da:ca:
                    33:fb:bb:93:fe:eb:c1:50:65:c2:47:70:87:5e:ab:
                    a3:d5:ec:9b:5c:65:7a:ba:7d:92:20:a1:80:9b:d6:
                    79:71:be:15:56
                ASN1 OID: prime256v1
                NIST CURVE: P-256
        Attributes:
            (none)
            Requested Extensions:
    Signature Algorithm: ecdsa-with-SHA256
    Signature Value:
        30:46:02:21:00:81:28:11:28:9b:92:cb:b8:d9:d2:1c:3c:8d:
        00:1f:4e:44:ae:ba:61:7f:ca:17:75:d9:d4:11:04:fa:11:e8:
        a2:02:21:00:f2:f4:11:77:5c:32:c8:d5:86:66:29:d5:ae:27:
        3f:64:31:be:f8:4a:89:29:bf:e0:01:b4:f2:63:1f:f0:f0:fb
```

> ## Errors

Reviewer: Add a separation line

```suggestion

## Errors
```

### Certificate Signing Request creation fails due to invalid device id

If non-supported characters are used for the device id then the cert create-csr will fail with below error:

```text
Error: failed to Generate the Certificate Signing Request.

Caused by:
    0: DeviceID Error
    1: The string '"+"' contains characters which cannot be used in a name [use only A-Z, a-z, 0-9, ' = ( ) , - . ? % * _ ! @]
```

### Certificate Signing Request already exists in the given location

> If the CSR file already exists you may see following error:

Reviewer: Be more assertive.

```suggestion
If the CSR file already exists the command fails with:
```

```text
Error: failed to Generate the Certificate Signing Request.

Caused by:
    A certificate already exists and would be overwritten.
            Existing file: "/etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-csr.csr"
```

> Remove the CSR file manually and try executing [`tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) again.

Reviewer: Be more assertive

```suggestion
Remove the CSR file manually and re-execute [`tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) again.
```

---
title: Certificate signing request
tags: [Operate, Security, Cloud]
description: Generate certificate signing request for %%te%%
---

If you want to use a device certificate which is signed by a Certificate Authority (CA), you can generate the Certificate Signing Request (CSR), which is later used by CA to generate a device certificate. This process requires additional tooling as %%te%% provides you only with the CSR. 

## Create a certificate signing request

To create a CSR you can use [`tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) %%te%% command:

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr --device-id alpha
```

or

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr
```

> if a self-signed certificate already exists and you want to reuse device name.

Reviewer 2: Technically it does not have to be a self-signed certificate, just any existing device certificate.

```suggestion
if a device certificate already exists and you want to reuse device name.
```

```text title="Output"
Certificate Signing Request was successfully created.
```

:::note

> `tedge cert` requires `sudo` privilege as creating a private key owned by the MQTT broker. This command provides no output on success.

Reviewer 2: Though the command only creates a private key if one does not already exist right?

Reviewer 2: Actually, we can leave it as is, as you need sudo access as well when creating the csr in the default location (under `/etc/tedge/device-certs`).

Reviewer: Things are subtle here - but I don't think this needs to be documented.
- root privileges are required for `sudo tedge cert create-cs --device-id xyz` because a new private key is generated
- no privilege is required for `sudo tedge cert create-cs` because the private key is reused.

I think a better approach would have been to `chown` no files inside the command, and to ask the user to run `sudo -u mosquitto tedge cert create  --device-id xyz`  using the appropriate owner for the certificate.

:::

Now you should have a CSR in the `/etc/tedge/device-certs/` directory:

```sh
ls -l /etc/tedge/device-certs/
```

```text title="Output"
total 8

> -r--r--r-- 1 mosquitto mosquitto 664 May 31 09:26 tedge-csr.csr

Reviewer 2: The double usage of `csr` seems unnecessary. We should change the default csr file name just to `tedge.csr`

                NIST CURVE: P-256
        Attributes:
            (none)
            Requested Extensions:
    Signature Algorithm: ecdsa-with-SHA256
    Signature Value:
        30:46:02:21:00:81:28:11:28:9b:92:cb:b8:d9:d2:1c:3c:8d:
        00:1f:4e:44:ae:ba:61:7f:ca:17:75:d9:d4:11:04:fa:11:e8:
        a2:02:21:00:f2:f4:11:77:5c:32:c8:d5:86:66:29:d5:ae:27:
        3f:64:31:be:f8:4a:89:29:bf:e0:01:b4:f2:63:1f:f0:f0:fb
```

## Errors

### Certificate Signing Request creation fails due to invalid device id

If non-supported characters are used for the device id then the cert create-csr will fail with below error:

```text
Error: failed to Generate the Certificate Signing Request.

Caused by:
    0: DeviceID Error
    1: The string '"+"' contains characters which cannot be used in a name [use only A-Z, a-z, 0-9, ' = ( ) , - . ? % * _ ! @]
```

### Certificate Signing Request already exists in the given location

If the CSR file already exists the command fails with:  

```text
Error: failed to Generate the Certificate Signing Request.

Caused by:
    A certificate already exists and would be overwritten.
            Existing file: "/etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-csr.csr"

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what the benefit would be to prevent overwriting an already created CSR. It is more likely that the user is going to forget to delete the CSR after getting the public certificate, so this just makes it more difficult to managed, as the user has to read the output, delete the file, then re-run the command.

---

If you want to use a device certificate which is signed by a Certificate Authority (CA), you can generate the Certificate Signing Request (CSR), which is later used by CA to generate a device certificate. This process requires additional tooling as %%te%% provides you only with the CSR. 

## Create a certificate signing request

To create a CSR you can use [`tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) %%te%% command:

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr --device-id alpha
```

or

```sh
sudo tedge cert create-csr
```
if public key already exists and you want to reuse device name.

```text title="Output"
Certificate Signing Request was successfully created.
```

:::note
`tedge cert` requires `sudo` privilege. This command provides no output on success.
:::

[`sudo tedge cert create-csr`](../../references/cli/tedge-cert.md) creates the certificate signing request in a default location (`/etc/tedge/device-certs/`).
To use a custom location, refer to [`tedge config`](../../references/cli/tedge-config.md).

Now you should have a CSR in the `/etc/tedge/device-certs/` directory.

```sh
ls -l /etc/tedge/device-certs/
```

```text title="Output"
total 8

> -r--r--r-- 1 mosquitto mosquitto 664 May 31 09:26 tedge-csr.csr

Reviewer: Unless we provide a `tedge` command to show the CSR, it would be good to provide the user a hint on how to check the CSR.

```
$ openssl req -in /etc/tedge/device-certs/tedge-csr.csr -noout -text
```
